---
author: alex
date: 2011-03-29 05:42:03 -0700
layout: post
slug: rss-i-cant-quit-you
status: publish
title: 'RSS, I can''t quit you. '
wordpress_id: '127'
categories:
- curation
- social
tags:
- curation
- feed
- RSS
---

On occasion my blog posts receive outside attention, like when a piece
get's featured on a more popular website. For instance I was quoted in
an article over at the
[register](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/03/15/apple_ios_throttles_web_apps_on_home_screen/)
last week, and that catapulted my stats for a day. Regardless of what
drives traffic to my blog, most readers of my blog seem interested in
RSS. That is fine with me, because I like talking about the finer points
of RSS just like everyone else. What I think I need to do with that is
to try to explore RSS some more, because it’s not all that often I
imagine you get more than a couple 100 people reading, and thinking
about RSS. To start I would like to make it clear that when I say RSS I
mean any feed type, but it does mean a standard of some kind. Also it
should probably be a self substantial piece of information. That is a
very grey line though. I want to talk about reading feeds. Like the
details of my reading system. I would love to know more about how others
read too. One thing
[McLuhan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshall_McLuhan) has taught me
is that how we use a technology is as important s what information that
technologies is delivering. Is not just to be complete, and thorough
though. I get a ton of use out of knowing how other people use things.
Curation is hugely important to me. I really want to get into that. How
does one decide what makes the cut. Are their levels, or multiple
circles in which you share information. What tools do you use for
curation. What is the most frustrating thing about the current crop of
curation tools. I know that many larger curators like Rober Scoble have
themselves talked about curst ion tools, so it might be worth while to
roundup what they have said. Finding new blogs, I don’t often find new
super awesome blogs. I wish too that people would talk about new blog
more often. I feel that sometimes in the blog community people ten to
keep these things to them selves. What if anything do places like
tumblr, and posterous have to do with feeds. Like what happens of they
all decide one day to turn off RSS. Mostly I am hoping I can drum up
some conversation from the people who read this blog. Unless feed burner
is lying to me, there re now over 400 people reading this blog,
hopefully many of you read this far, and have something to say.
