---
author: alex
date: 2011-06-27 17:10:39 -0700
layout: post
slug: my-first-attempt-at-figuring-out-why-the-awl-is-so-good
status: publish
title: My first attempt at figuring out why The Awl is so good.
wordpress_id: '293'
---

I am going to leave the breakdown of weighty subjects to other people,
and hopefully I am biting off a small chunk of this pie, but I want to
try my hand at figuring out why something is so good. I am going to
start with blogs as a whole. I have become entranced by blogs in the
last few years, they have seriously started to become important voices
in their own right. They aren't deriving their awesomeness from any
other medium, they are bloggers through and through. At least the blogs
that I love to read. The blog that has come to define blogging for me is
[The Awl](http://www.theawl.com/). The Awl was created by [Choire
Sicha](witter.com/choire), and in there own words they were created to
"encourage a daily discussion of the issues of the day—news, politics,
culture (and TV!)—during sensible hours of the working week."
([source](http://www.theawl.com/about) [Yesterday I saw the title of a a
post of there's, it was titled "](http://www.theawl.com/about)[Hurley
Killed Rosie
Larsen](http://www.theawl.com/2011/06/hurley-killed-rosie-larsen)". When
I clicked through I found this.
![image](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/133599/Screenshots/v3x_.png) First for
context. This is a blog post playing on a recent TV show called [The
Killing](http://www.amctv.com/shows/the-killing). The Killing was really
good a building suspense, just like another infamous TV show Lost, and
just like Lost they built the entire season up, and then didn't give
satisfactory answers, I still think it's a good TV show, and I think
anyone else who likes TV would think it's a good TV show as well. If we
look at who The Awl is trying to serve you can see already they are
hitting their core market TV enthusiasts. Which I am one of so already
one big hash mark on the big board. The more subtle reason that this
blog post is awesome, this very small blog post, is indicative of the
medium that its written in. Blogs have this ability to cary on a
relationship with the reader like nothing before. Maybe it's a time and
place kind of thing, but I think it's different. Blog's, good blog's at
least, are built on people, and tone. You the reader come to expect a
certain ebb, and flow from a blog. Not only can you fall in love with
tone, but blogs can last for years. Who knows now long blogs will last
for, can you imagine seeing the tag line 'worlds oldest blog', but The
Awl has been going on since 2009. Other blogs I read have been going on
longer. So, on a multi-daily basis I am getting updates from a real
person. There ideas a permeating my life. Finally, thing that makes my
stomach turn, in a good way, like this in a life changing way, is that
it made me laugh out loud, it literally made me LOL. I can't imagine
reading something in a newspaper like this blog post. It's more like a
friend who had a really good one liner, and he said it at a party. This
the most amazing part, blogs are broadcast. Somehow blogs have figured
out how to cross the broadcast/personal barrier. This wasn't the first
time I felt The Awl was just killing it, and I realize that the main
reason that I think The Awl is so good is because I like the Awl, but
that I think is the trick here. This one post only makes sense if you
have a long-standing relationship with the blog. This personalization of
broadcast mediums is what makes The Awl, and this one post so good.
