---
author: alex
date: 2011-05-16 06:09:59 -0700
layout: post
slug: a-quickie-about-how-i-use-rss
status: publish
title: A quickie about how I use rss
wordpress_id: '143'
categories:
- curation
- social
---

I saw [Alexis Madrigal](http://www.theatlantic.com/alexis-madrigal/)
talking about using RSS on twitter today. He mentioned that he felt
twitter was better at surfacing things that he wanted to write about
then a RSS reader. I know nothing about how he uses a reader, or what he
has in it, but I wondered how he was using his reader.

In my opinion, if you setup your reader correctly, it will always be
better then twitter. Now, I don’t want to presume what correct is, but I
have a system that works for me, and I have found
[more](http://nerdgap.com/create-your-own-internet-newspaper/) then one
[person](http://patrickrhone.com/2010/02/15/my-rss-system/) that does it
similarly. Since I have been [talking
about](http://alexkessinger.net/2011/03/29/rss-i-cant-quit-you/),
[talking about
RSS](http://alexkessinger.net/2011/03/14/something-i-wanted-to-say-about-rss-for-a-long-time/),
I figured this was a great opportunity to talk about RSS. ([my Drupal
con
presentation](http://alexkessinger.net/2010/03/24/alex-kessinger-drupal-con-sf-2010-presentation-notes-page/))
I like to use a triage system. I start by making sure I have my feeds in
Google Reader. This is important because so many RSS readers now days
use google reader as a sync system. I wish there was another, just so
that there was competition, but it’s what we have. If you put everything
in google reader you can make sure that all your devices are in sync. If
you only use one device for feed reading this may not be as big of a
deal for you. Now that everything is in a feed reader, I like to
separate my feeds into a priority system. I like to use numbers, because
they get sorted correctly as first in most places. I use a 1 - 10
system. 1 has the most important feeds. These feeds are something I can
clean out in less then 20 minutes. 20 minutes is key. I have found that
if in 20 minutes you can find something that makes you feel like 20
minutes was worthwhile your brain will fire some of those good
chemicals, and you will start to create the checking blog habit. The
habit is the key to a successful blog reading system. If you miss out on
this habit part, blogs are going to feel like a big waste of time. This
will invariably lead a no blog reading system. Here is my pro tip about
choosing feeds to begin with. This will keep you from screwing up on
your first step. Don’t subscribe to the New York Times, or CNN. Stop.
Don’t. I mean it. You might think you care about general news, but you
don’t. Very few people do. You should start with what you care about,
and remember there won’t be anyone looking over your shoulder, so if you
like TMZ, read TMZ. What’s great about the triage system is that once
you have cleared out your first step you are reading. You won’t wan’t to
stop reading. So you will start clearing out your second step. Once you
have built the habit, you will find that you will start building out
more blogs then you can read in 20 minutes. That is fine, but the second
problem you are going to run in too is the it’s to much for me problem.
Many people I have talked with feel bad about not reading everything.
When they open up their reader, all they can see is a ton of stuff they
haven’t read. Don’t do that, don’t feel like that. RSS feeds are a
river, getting the good stuff is like fishing. Just create a good net,
and let the rest flow by. If it’s important enough you will almost
always pick it up in secondary systems like email, and twitter. The last
step in the reading system is a read it later service. I use instapaper,
but you can using anything you want. The goal is that as you come across
something interesting throw it into instapaper, but keep reading your
feeds. That is the only way you will read at any higher volume. I
realize that if I was a person who was paid to report, I would have to
time to follow a thread all the way to the bottom, but I think this is a
system that would help most people. PS: here is my current set of
[feeds](http://sia.tw/kHFM61) in opml format.
