---
author: alex
date: 2010-08-12 06:13:32 -0700
layout: post
slug: medium-curators-and-jason-santa-maria
status: publish
title: Medium, Curators, and Jason Santa Maria
wordpress_id: '79'
---

If you haven't checked out anything from [Jason Santa
Maria](https://jasonsantamaria.com/), go check his blog out. He has been
around for a long time, I think. The fact that I don't know much about
him is what impresses me the most. I have read a few of his blog post,
but each one has been incisive, and powerful so that they stand on their
own. I don't need to know who he is to understand the he gets it. He
understands the types of conversations that need to happen in order to
advance the web as a medium.

I loved watching this
[video](https://vimeo.com/4394152)
with him speaking in it, it's been sitting in my queue for quite sometime, and finally
tonight, screaming baby in tow, I took the time to watch it.

Its quick like 12 minutes, but he breaks down an important discussion.
Why isn't the visual design of print get translated online. He gave two
good examples from Wired Magazine. He is right, the magazine layouts
were beautiful, and the web versions were not. Not only that but they
were robbed of there visual interesting-ness. He goes on to show how on
his site he is attempting the ability to give each piece, I hazard to
call them blog posts because they are so stunning, a distinct visual
layout. He is succeeding in his goal to bring visual identity for
individual pieces to the web.

This is where the discussion divides. Websites, unlike print, can be
consumed in so many different manners I think unfair to attempt to give
the digital form style in the first place. It's worthwhile if it matters
to yourself, but how can you translate the visual identity into a blog
reader, or across twitter, or in pull quotes on other peoples websites.
The web is in effect formless.

Twitter is a great example, each tweet has a permalink, a webpage that
displays just that tweet, but is that it's form? I don't think so,
tweets are more often then not consumed someplace else. I believe this
has the effect of disinter-mediating tweets from form.

Medium as the thrust of the discussion, is why I am so excited about the
video. In talking about webpages as a collection of information he
contrasted them with physical collections of information. A magazine is
a stack of articles. A magazine has a defined form, it's only as big as
it. Our brains can look at that stack and gauage how much information is
in there. All this is being lost in digital translation. There is an
answer though.

This being a medium discussion means that we can talk about how things
can't be translated from one medium to another. The fact that the web is
formless frees us from trying to form it physically, but that doesn't
mean we can't collect it. We can still create windows into the massive
amount of information, but it is all done through other people, through
curators.

[Jason Kottke](kottke.org) is a curator. He has a website, which has
it's own formless stream of content like all others, but I know this
one. I know that I will get x number of posts a day, generally, I know
what size it will be. I know that I will be delighted by a large amount
of it. All these are starting to look like the very things we get from
books, and magazines. The people around us will provide the form for our
content, and the window in the massless, formless pile of content.

Design will still be a huge part of the web though, we still need
visually interesting stuff, and enjoy how layout can change the meaning
of a story, I just don't see it being huge past helping people read the
content better.
