---
author: alex
date: 2010-09-24 16:25:57 -0700
layout: post
slug: making-progressively-enhanced-pasta
status: publish
title: Making Progressively Enhanced Pasta
wordpress_id: '93'
---

Last night I made a [progressively
enhanced](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progressive_enhancement) dinner.
In deference to my vegan, and vegetarian friends I don't think I would
call my dinner "enhanced". I don't think it means that my meal was
better then theirs. I guess it was a progressively differentiated meal,
but the idea's of Progressive Enhancement were core to my meal making.

It started with pasta. I have been making pasta, and my own pasta sauce
for a number of years now. I even created a video once that covers the
basics. I have a few new tricks up my sleeve, but mostly around adaptability.

My the pasta, is always a semolina, but I have a friend who is sensitive
to gluten. They brought their own rice based pasta. That is where its
starts though, by having two pastas, I have already created two
branching points.

The most Spartan meal that could be main would be the cooked, unsauced
pasta, and it would be good. That I believe is the core of the meal.
Though, for more advanced people, I support a more rich experience.

For those picky people, who dislike mushrooms, I made a mushroom, onion,
and garlic thingy separate from everything else, that was vegan. The
mushroom thingy could be added to any pasta bowl, by it's very nature.

Other then the mushroom thingy, I made two base sauces. One was a fully
vegan tomato suace made from canned whole tomatoes, and another sauce
was a sausage based sauce also made from canned whole tomatoes.

Both sauces start the same. Browning some onions, and garlic in a pan
with some form of fat, olive oil for vegans, a little butter for
non-vegans. Then I added the sausage in the non-vegan pasta, cook until
browned. At this point both pots have built a pretty good fond.
Naturally I added some liquid to absorb the fond into the sauce. Since a
couple of the vegans are also straight edge I try not to cook with
alcohol. I deglaze the vegan sauce with strained tomato juice. The
non-vegan sauce I almost always just throw in a bit of whatever I am
drinking, at least if it's close to simple. No Guinness, or wine
spritzers, but it could be beer or wine, it doesn't matter.

At this stage, I have let the tomato juice boil down a bit, and then
throw in the whole tomatoes and break them apart a little, and then let
the sauced stew on a low heat for 20 minutes, or so.

At this point you can build many dishes, I think this is a factorial
operation. I have 5 basic ingrediants(semolina pasta, rice pasta,
mushrooms, vegan sauce, sausage sauce). 5 factorial is a 120 sepereate
dishes. From simple pasta, to overly sauced rice-pasta, mixed with
semolina pasta, that is for adavanced people. Just like only advanced
browsers can support advanced web page building tasks.
