---
author: alex
date: 2011-06-15 16:14:25 -0700
layout: post
slug: 5-good-links
status: publish
title: 5 good links
wordpress_id: '289'
categories:
- articles
---

*[Invisible Inkling | Ryan Sholin on the future of news. And other
stuff.](http://ryansholin.com/)* Social Memories: an Infographic Book of
your Facebook Activity: Your very own Feltron report, if you don't mind
that it's limited to all the information it can get from your Facebook
account. Workshop: Advanced WordPress with NYU's Studio20: Daniel
Bachhuber's notes from a workshop with Jay Rosen's students.

*[shaver »
because no respectable MBA programme would admit
me](http://shaver.off.net/diary/2010/07/13/because-no-respectable-mba-programme-would-admit-me/)*
I read (and talk) a lot about various "management topics". I've been
doing this since long before I managed anything more significant than my
own clothing choices, because part of my brain was swollen in a
childhood bicycle accident; it deprives other parts of my brain of blood
and nutrients, explaining in part why I know a lot about how
decision-making processes can fall apart, but usually can't remember to
have lunch.

*[Crowdsourced document analysis and MP
expenses](http://simonwillison.net/2009/Dec/20/crowdsourcing/)* As you
may have heard, the UK government released a fresh batch of MP expenses
documents a week ago on Thursday. I spent that week working with a small
team at Guardian HQ to prepare for the release.

*[Unlearning | Derek
Sivers](http://sivers.org/unlearning)* When I would speak on panels at
music conferences, I'd always find it funny how all of the panelists'
opinions were completely tainted by their own self-interest. Someone
would always ask us, "What's the future of the music business?" The guy
whose company sells MP3s would say, "MP3s are the future.

*[The Customer
Development Manifesto: Reasons for the Revolution (part 1) « Steve
Blank](http://steveblank.com/2009/08/31/the-customer-development-manifesto-reasons-for-the-revolution-part-1/)*
This post makes more sense if you read the previous post - The Leading
Cause of Startup Death: The Product Development Diagram. After 20 years
of working in startups, I decided to take a step back and look at the
product development model I had been following and see why it usually
failed to provide useful guidance in activities outside the building -
sales, marketing and business development.
